In this code example, we will be looking at
a simple program with an inner and an outer loop,
and inside this nested loop is an array which we can access by other loop index.
Now the idea here is to show that the auto of the index when accessing the array,
which is a tiny detail can cause the code to speed up or slow down by a factor of two.
Knowing about the cache,
its structure and the structure of data and memory helps us to
design more cache-friendly code which can speed up the programs we write a lot.
So let's have a look here.
So before we go into the example,
let's take a look at the program we're about to execute. Let's start from the top.
We have two includes here, the first is chrono,
the second is iostream.
Chrono ship us a lot of time functions,
the functions for time measurement,
functions for time formatting and it's a library inside the Standard Template Library.
int main, we are first creating an array, which is done here,
we are inserting the size of the array here
and currently in the first example that's going to be four.
So we are having a four by four static integer array that
means 16 elements which are going to be stored in memory.
This one here this call,
this basically saves the current time into the variable t1.
We are using the chrono library here especially the high resolution clock
from chrono and now gives us the current time,
and in order to not write out the lengthy return value data type,
we can simply use auto to have a much shorter form of specifying t1.
We don't need to know what auto is all about,
what the compiler says,
the correct data type would be,
you can now see it in the pop up here and by using
auto we can spare us from writing this all out here.
Okay. T1 holds the time at this point in time when line number 10 gets executed.
Then we have a nested loop,
which is running in lines 11 and 13,
we have an outer loop which uses the variable i and runs from zero to size minus one,
the same for J in the inner loop running from zero to size minus one.
Inside the inner loop,
we have the writing operation which writes data into the array.
We are using j and i as indexes to address the current data element,
the respective data element inside x and we are writing
the result of the addition i plus j into this location here.
It's not important that we are using i plus j,
we could also use a constant value or only i or only zero something,
it doesn't really matter.
What's of interest is the amount of time it
takes to write information to this array here.
Before we get to the point where we can see how this time can be computed,
let's look at the output here,
we are using cout from the iostream library to output
the address of the respective cells in the array.
So ampersand x, j and i gives us the address
of the jth and ith location of the element here.
We're also putting out i and j for reference and after the loop has been completed,
we are again measuring the execution time here, high-resolution clock now.
So this gives us the second moment in time.
The first was stored up here, t1,
now we have the second time measurement and this call here chrono
duration cast actually gives us the difference between t2 and t1 in microseconds.
We can also choose nano seconds here or milliseconds or seconds but for now,
I think microseconds is a good way to look at
the execution time and this information is stored in duration.
As you can see, it's a long variable and it's the number of
microseconds which it took for the program to execute
between lines 11 and line 19 or line 18
and now we are printing the execution time to
the console and that's basically what's happening here.
Let's simply run the program to see what happens,
we're going to look at the details in the example,
but just for reference now,
so what you can see here is a bunch of memory addresses.
These are all the 16 addresses at which the information inside
the array is stored together with the respective indexes,
i and j and we get the execution time which is 98 microseconds,
and I'm executing this right now to tell you that this
actually is not the time it takes to access the array.
This would be pretty slow.
This is the amount of time it takes to print something to
the console which is a very slow operation and now as to see what I mean,
let's simply comment out this line here,
let's execute the program again and as you can see,
the execution time now it's down to zero microseconds.
It's even below the scale we can measure using the microseconds.
We can simply change this to nanoseconds,
to make it even more high resolution, nanoseconds.
Now let's execute it a third time,
see what happens here.
Now, we see that it took the program 144 nanoseconds to execute this array here.
Let's revert back to microseconds,
what we can also do is we can increment the amount of arrays inside the array,
let's for example use 1,000 elements so it's now an array holding a million integers,
let's see what happens here.
What you can see now is that it took 3,349
microseconds to execute this code where we accessed a million addresses in memory.
That's the program we're going to look at in the example.
I wish you a lot of fun with looking at
this particular example here where we look at cache-friendly coding,
because the time measurement results here depending on
the order of j and i here and this inner loop here,
they are quite huge.
This is an example where you can get a lot of
runtime performance out of a very small change in the code.
You will soon see. Have fun.